# VCGLibForParaview
VCGLibForParaview is an university project for the Scientific and Large Data
Visualization course of the University of Pisa.

The main goal is bringing the VCG (http://vcg.isti.cnr.it/vcglib/)
functionalities inside Paraview but also providing a set of utilities to make 
really confortable moving between the VCG world and the VTK one or viceversa.
The result is a Paraview plugin with the many advanced VCG algorithms
encapsulated in single place and completely available through the
pipeline-based framework. 

## Table of Contents
* [Installation](#installation)
* [Documentation](#documentation)
  * [Hausdorff Distance](#hausdorff-distance)
    * [Inputs](#inputs)
    * [Outputs](#outputs)
    * [Properties](#properties)
  * [Uniform Random Sampling](#uniform-random-sampling)
* [Contributing](#contributing)
  * [Filters](#filters)
* [License](#license)

## Installation
Once downloaded the source code, go into the directory

```
cd VCGLibForParaview
```

and get all the dependencies by running:

```
git submodules update --init
```

this starts the download of the VCGLib from the `develop` branch.

In order to build the Paraview plugin, make a directory (outside the source 
directoy preferably) where the `MakeFile` will be generated:

```
mkdir ../VCGLibForParaview_build && cd ../VCGLibForParaview_build
```

then run `ccmake` from inside the current directoy specifing as argument the 
source directory

```
ccmake ../VCGLibForParaview
```

Generally all the configurations are set correctely, but if you want build the
plugin in `debug` mode you have to set the option `CMAKE_BUILD_TYPE` to
`Debug`. After this type `c` (configure) and `g` (generate the makefile and
exit).

Finally build the plugin running:

```
make
``` 

and inside the directory the `libVCG` shared library should be appeared.

Now open Paraview and load the library through the Plugin Manager
(`Tools > Manage Plugin`) by clicking in `Load New...` and selecting the
shared library. If no errors are occured, the entry `VCG` is shown with status 
`Loaded` and in the `Filters` section the `VCG` group is added with
all the filters of this plugin as well.

## Documentation
Since the actual small numbers of the functionalities available through the
puglin, the relative documentation about them is exposed here waiting for future
contributes to move all into a wiki's page.

### Hausdorff Distance
Hausdorff Distance is a filter that given two meshes, one as `source`
and the other as `target` (both of type `VTKDataSet` to be as
general as possible) it returns the Hausdorff Distance as field data
of the output along further data depending on how the filter
properties have been set. The filter provides two output ports: 
* **PointCloudSource**: the sample points generated over the `source`'s
surface
* **PointCloudTarget**: the sample points generated over the `target`'s
surface

both of them contain those points made by the sampler to the computation
of the Hausdorff Distance. Moreover `PointCloudSource` keeps the output
fields data so they can be propagated over the pipeline.

#### Inputs
* **Source Data**
  * Type: `vtkDataSet`
  * Description: the `source` mesh
* **Target Data**
  * Type: `vtkDataSet`
  * Description: the `target` mesh

The filter works surfing over **triangular** faces, so in order
to apply this filter the Paraview's `Triangulate` filter has to be
considered if your mesh may be composed by different types of faces.

#### Outputs
* **DistanceRange**
  * Type: `double[3]`
  * Description: array where the first item is the minimum distance
  from `source` to `target`, the second item is the mean distance from 
  `source` to `target` and the third one is the maximum distance
  from `source` to `target` (equivalent to **HausdorffDistance**).
* **HausdorffDistance**
  * Type: `double`
  * Description: the value of the Hausdorff Distance computed from the 
  `source` mesh to `target` mesh.
* **RMSDistance**
  * Type: `double`
  * Description: to ask

#### Properties
* **Number of Samples**
  * Type: `int`
  * Default: `10000`
  * Description: number of samples generated by the sampler over both the `source` and 
  `target`'s surfaces (sometimes can be less than the set number).
* **Diagonal Percent**
  * Type: `double`
  * Range: `[0,1]`
  * Default: `0.1`
  * Description: fraction of the `source` bounding box diagonal length that a point of
  the `target` surface can be far at most from a point of the `source` surface to be
  consider as valid point during the Hausdorff Distant computation.
* **Sample Edge**
  * Type: `bool`
  * Default: `false`
  * Description: run the sampling process also over the `source`'s edges.
* **Sample Faux Edge**
  * Type: `bool`
  * Default: `false`
  * Description: to ask
* **Sample Vert**
  * Type: `bool`
  * Default: `false`
  * Description: run the sampling process also over the `source`'s vertexes.
* **Save Sample**
  * Type: `bool`
  * Default: `true`
  * Description: store the sample points generated over both the `source` and `target`
  surfaces into the `PointCloudSource` and the `PointCloudTarget` respectively.

### Uniform Random Sampling

## Contributing
Paraview allow you to extend it by `Filter`s but also `Reader`s and `Writer`s, 
as explain here [Paraview/Plugin HowTo](https://www.paraview.org/Wiki/ParaView/Plugin_HowTo).
Since the actual version of the plugin exports just Paraview's filters, only
they will be covered by this section.

### Filters
It's highly recommended reading the Paraview documentation [Adding a Filter](https://www.paraview.org/Wiki/ParaView/Plugin_HowTo#Adding_a_Filter) on the Paraview Wiki page *Plugin HowTo*,
since the following instruction steps are derived from those ones
described in that page.

First of all, create a directory over the path `src/filter` with the name of
the new filter (e.g. `src/filters/NewVCGAlgorithm`) and put there all the
source code files. As name for the filter class use the convention `vcgXXXFilter`
(e.g. `vcgNewVCGAlgorithmFilter`) in order to distinguish it from the VTK
classes.

Then there are two files to update to include the new filter inside the plugin:

#### `CMakeLists.txt`
Add the path of your directory filter inside the `include_directories` statement
and add the path of the filter `.cpp` file in `SERVER_MANAGER_SOURCES`.

```CMake
include_directories(
  vcglib
  ...
  src/filters/NewVCGAlgorithm
)

...

ADD_PARAVIEW_PLUGIN(
  VCG
  "1.0"
  SERVER_MANAGER_XML VCGPlugin.xml
  SERVER_MANAGER_SOURCES  ...
                          src/filters/NewVCGAlgorithm/vcgNewVCGAlgorithmFiler.cpp
)
```

#### `VCGPlugin.xml`
To make interactable your plugin from Paraview you have to add a `SourceProxy`
tag which describe its componenents (e.g. input ports, output ports, parameters,
etc). The body of the `SourceProxy` should be like as follow:

```XML
<SourceProxy name="NewVCGAlgorithmFilter"
             class="vcgNewVCGAlgorithmFilter"
             label="New VCG Algorithm">
  
  <!-- Put your stuff here -->
  
  <Hints> 
    <ShowInMenu category="VCG" />
  </Hints>
</SourceProxy>
```
Remember to declare the `ShowInMenu` tag with the `category` attribute set 
to `VCG`, so the filter will be grouped with the other ones in the `VCG`
section of the Paraview `Filters` menu.

## License
VCGLibForParaview is licensed under the terms of the MIT License. See the [LICENSE](https://github.com/korut94/VCGLibForParaview/blob/master/LICENSE) file for details.
